DBCON-187: Database Connector - Example/Userdefined data type (#1113)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: db/1.8/modules/ROOT/pages/database-connector-udt-stored-procedure.adoc

= Call Oracle Stored Procedure with User-Defined Types (UDT) Example - Mule 4

> Oracle enables you to define your own custom data types known as User-Defined Types (UDT). The following example shows how to call the stored procedure with an object of type `PEOPLE` (a UDT) as input. This object contains a list of `PERSON` objects (also a UDT). Only the people whose `age` is less than 100 should be inserted into the table. The stored procedure will produce an output of type `PHONE_BOOK` which is a list of varchars containing the phone numbers of the people added to the table. The example also shows how to use `createStruct` and `createArray` DataWeave functions to map application data to your custom types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oracle enables you to define your own custom data types, known as _user-defined types (UDTs)_. The following example shows how to call a stored procedure with an object of type `PEOPLE` (a UDT) as input. This object contains a list of objects of type `PERSON` (also a UDT). Only the people whose `age` is less than 100 should be inserted into the table. The stored procedure produces an output of type `PHONE_BOOK`, which is a list of varchars containing the phone numbers of the people added to the table. The example also shows how to use `createStruct` and `createArray` DataWeave functions to map application data to your custom types.
```
Is PHONE_BOOK not also a UDT?

Reviewer: When I got down to the topic of setting up the objects with the script, I realized that I had not seen a very clear statement of what the example is of or is supposed to show, in terms of the scenario. Can we clarify that the purpose of all these topics is to show how to create a database of people less than 100 years old and their phone numbers (and why this would be useful)?

The following screenshot shows the Anypoint Studio app flow for this example:

.Oracle UDTs Flow
image::database-oracle-udt-flow.png[Oracle UDTs Flow in Anypoint Studio]

== DataWeave createStruct and createArray Functions

> The example uses the `createStruct` and `createArray` DataWeave functions to map application data to our custom types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example uses the `createStruct` and `createArray` DataWeave functions to map application data to the example custom types.
```

> The `createStruct` function creates JDBC Struct objects based on the `Name` type and their correspondent properties. In our example, types `PERSON` and `PHONE_NUMBER` are struct objects. The function expects the following parameters in order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `createStruct` function creates JDBC struct objects based on the `Name` type and their corresponding properties. In the example, types `PERSON` and `PHONE_NUMBER` are struct objects. The function expects the following parameters in order:
```

* `configName` +

> A string with the name of the configuration in charge of creating the `Struct` type, in our example is `dbConfig`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A string with the name of the configuration that creates the `Struct` type: in this example, `dbConfig`
```

* `typeName` +

> A string with the name of the `Struct` type to create, in our example is `PERSON` or `PHONE_NUMBER`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A string with the name of the `Struct` type to create: in this example, `PERSON` or `PHONE_NUMBER`
```

* `values` +

> An array of values that conforms the `Struct` properties, in our example an array with the property values for `PHONE_NUMBER` is `['046', '666']`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An array of values that conforms to the `Struct` properties: in this example, for `PHONE_NUMBER`, `['046', '666']`.
```

> The `createArray` function creates JDBC Array objects based on the `Array` type. In our example, types `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY`, `PEOPLE` and `PHONE_BOOK` are array objects. The function expects the following parameters in order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `createArray` function creates JDBC array objects based on the `Array` type. In this example, types `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY`, `PEOPLE`, and `PHONE_BOOK` are array objects. The function expects the following parameters in order:
```

* `configName` +

> A string with the name of the configuration in charge of creating the `Array` type, in our example is `dbConfig`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A string with the name of the configuration that creates the `Array` type: in this example, `dbConfig`
```

* `typeName` +

> A string with the name of the `Array` type to create, in our example is `PEOPLE` or `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A string with the name of the `Array` type to create: in this example, `PEOPLE` or `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY`
```

* `values` +

> An array of values that conforms the `Array` type, in our example is an array of `PERSON` objects created using the `createStruct` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An array of values that conforms the `Array` type: in this example, is an array of `PERSON` objects created using the `createStruct` function
```

> Note that you can combine and use these functions to create subtypes or nested types. In our example, the type `PERSON` contains the `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY` objects. At the same time, the type `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY` is defined as an array of `PHONE_NUMBER`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that you can combine and use these functions to create subtypes or nested types. In this example, the type `PERSON` contains the `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY` objects. At the same time, the type `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY` is defined as an array of `PHONE_NUMBER`.
```

> Additionally, you can combine these functions for complex types, ensure to use the `createArray` function when you are matching to an UDT based on the `Array` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can combine these functions for complex types if you use the `createArray` function when you are matching to a UDT based on the `Array` type.
```
"matching to"? or just "matching"?

Reviewer: BREAK HERE TO COMMIT

== Initialize the Oracle Database

> First, initialize the Oracle database using your desired SQL client tool by running the following script that creates these UDTs: `PEOPLE`, `PERSON`, `PHONE_NUMBER`, `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY` and `PHONE_BOOK`. The order in which these UDTs are defined is important because some of the types are nested. For example, the type `PERSON` is defined as an object that contains a `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY` as one of its members. The script also creates a table called `HUMANS` and a stored procedure called `PROC_INSERT_HUMANS`. +

Reviewer: "First"? What is this beginning? What were all the previous topics?
Can we clarify/reiterate what is beginning here, something like "The first task in ..." or "Before you can <do this>,..."?

Reviewer: I think I'd omit "the following" because the script is actually a bit away from this intro text:

```suggestion
Before calling the example stored procedure, use your desired SQL client tool to initialize the Oracle database by running a script that creates, in order, these UDTs: 
+
. `PEOPLE`
. `PERSON`
. `PHONE_NUMBER`
. `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY`
. `PHONE_BOOK`
+
Because some UDTs contain others, the order in which they are defined is important. For example, the container type `PERSON` must be defined before its member `PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY` is defined. 
+
The script also creates a table called `HUMANS` and a stored procedure called `PROC_INSERT_HUMANS`. +
```
Are the UDTs "created" or "defined"? Try to use one term consistently.
Also...is the "nesting" purposely left unclear? Does PEOPLE contain PERSON, and PERSON contain the other three?

> This stored procedure expects to receive an object of type `PEOPLE` as its input parameter, and will insert into the table `HUMANS` all the people whose age is less than 100. The stored procedure also defines a parameter of type `PHONE_BOOK`, that expects to receive the contact list of all the people previously inserted into the table `HUMANS` as an output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This stored procedure is intended to receive as an input parameter an object of type `PEOPLE`, from which it takes all the people whose age is less than 100 and inserts them into the table `HUMANS`. The stored procedure also defines an output parameter of type `PHONE_BOOK` that comprises a list of the phone numbers of all the people previously inserted into the `HUMANS` table.
```
We haven't explained how PERSONS under 100 are chosen from PEOPLE, have we?

> Script to initialize:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script run to creates these UDTs and initialize the Oracle database is as follows:
```

CREATE OR REPLACE TYPE PEOPLE IS TABLE OF PERSON;

CREATE OR REPLACE TYPE PHONE_BOOK AS VARRAY(10) OF VARCHAR2(200);

--CREATE TABLE HUMANS;
CREATE TABLE HUMANS(
  firstName VARCHAR(50),
  surname VARCHAR(50),
  age NUMBER,
  phoneNumbers PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY
);

--CREATE STORED PROCEDURE
create or replace procedure PROC_INSERT_HUMANS(people IN PEOPLE, contactList OUT PHONE_BOOK) IS
    phoneBook PHONE_BOOK := PHONE_BOOK();
    BEGIN
        FOR idx IN people.first .. people.last LOOP
            IF people(idx).age < 100 THEN
                INSERT INTO HUMANS(firstName, surname, age, phoneNumbers)
                VALUES(people(idx).firstName, people(idx).surname, people(idx).age, people(idx).phoneNumbers);
            END IF;
        END LOOP;

        FOR humanContact IN (SELECT * FROM  HUMANS h, TABLE(h.phoneNumbers) n) LOOP
            phoneBook.EXTEND(1);
            phoneBook(phoneBook.COUNT) := humanContact.surname || ',' || humanContact.firstname || ':' || humanContact.areaCode ||'-'|| humanContact.phoneNumber;
        END LOOP;

        contactList := phonebook;

        COMMIT;
END PROC_INSERT_HUMANS;
----

== Configure Global Elements

> Next, in Anypoint Studio configure an *HTTP Listener config* global element for the HTTP *Listener* source that initiates the flow, and a *Database Config* global element to list all the UDTs that were previously created in the Oracle database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you create your UDTs and initialize the database, go to Anypoint Studio and configure an *HTTP Listener config* global element for the HTTP *Listener* source that initiates the flow, and a *Database Config* global element to list the UDTs you created in the Oracle database:
```
The flow to do what?

. Create a new Mule project in Studio.
. Navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.

> . In the *Filter* field write `http`, select *HTTP Listener config* and click *OK*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Filter* field, type `http`, select *HTTP Listener config*, and click *OK*.
```

. In the *HTTP Listener config* window, set the following parameters:

* *Protocol* +
`HTTP (Default)` +
* *Host* +
`All Interfaces [0.0.0.0] (default)` +
* *Port* +
`8081`

[start=4]
. Click *OK*.
. In the *Global Elements* view, click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.

> . In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Filter* field, type `database`, select *Database Config*, and click *OK*.
```

. In the *Database Config* window, set the *Name* field to `dbConfig`.
. In the *Connection* field, select *Oracle Connection*.
. Click *Configure* to add the required Oracle JDBC driver and select either: +
+
* *Use local file* +

> Install the library using a local file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installs the library by using a local file.
```

* *Add Maven dependency* +

> Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installs a Maven dependency to add to the project.
```

+
[start=10]
. In the *Connection* section, set the following parameters: +
+
* *Host* +
`localhost`
* *Port* +
`1521`
* *User* +
`SYS as SYSDBA`
* *Password* +
`Oradoc_db1`
* *Instance* +
`ORCLCDB`
+
[start=11]
. On the *Advanced* tab, set the *Column types* field to *Edit inline*.

> . Click the plus sign (*+*) to add new column types, set the *Id* and *Type name* fields with the following values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the plus sign (*+*) to add new column types and specify the following values in the *Id* and *Type name* fields:
```

+
[%header,cols="30a,70a"]
|===
| Id | Type name
| 2003 |  `PEOPLE`
| 2003 |  `PHONE_NUMBER`
| 2008 |  `PERSON`
| 2003 |  `PHONE_ARRAY`
| 2003 |  `PHONE_BOOK`
|===
+
[start=13]
. Click *Finish* to close the *Column type* window.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect to the database.
. Click *OK*.

The following screenshot shows the HTTP Listener global element configuration in Studio:

.HTTP Listener configuration
image::database-oracleudt-example-1.png[HTTP Listener configuration]

> The following screenshots shows the Database global element configuration in Studio:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following screenshots show the Database global element configuration in Studio:
```

.Database Config General cofiguration
image::database-oracleudt-example-2.png[Database Config General configuration setting Host, Port, User, Password and Instance values parameters]

.Database Config Advanced cofiguration
image::database-oracleudt-example-3.png[Database Config advanced configuration setting Column types values]

> == Create and Run for your Mule App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Create and Run Your Mule App
```

Create the Mule app flow in Anypoint Studio:

. In the *Mule Palette* view, select the HTTP *Listener* source and drag it on to the canvas. +

> The source listens for incoming HTTP messages attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source listens for incoming HTTP message attributes.
```

. In the *Connector configuration* field, select `HTTP_Listener_config` global configuration.
. Set the *Path* field to `/oracle`.
. Drag a *Set Payload* component to the right of *Listener*. +

> This component set a list of items to send to the stored procedure to process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This component creates a list of items to send to the stored procedure for processing.
```

> . In the *Value* field, set the following code for the list of items: +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Value* field, specify items to be listed: +
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
[{'name':'Anthony J', 'surname':'Crowley', 'age': 6000, 'phoneNumber': {'areaCode':'020', 'phoneNumber': '777'}},
	{'name':'A.Z', 'surname':'Fell', 'age': 6000, 'phoneNumber':{'areaCode':'020', 'phoneNumber': '888'}},
	{'name':'Adam', 'surname':'Young', 'age': 11, 'phoneNumber':{'areaCode':'046', 'phoneNumber': '666'}},
	{'name':'Anathema', 'surname':'Device', 'age': 27, 'phoneNumber':{'areaCode':'020', 'phoneNumber': '123'}},

> 	]

Reviewer: Are these names supposed to be humorous? 
If so, rethink that: humor does not translate well across cultures.

----
+

.Set Payload configuration
image::database-oracleudt-example-4.png[Set payload configuration]

[start=7]

> . Set the *Mime Type* field to `application/java`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Set the *Mime Type* field to `application/java`.
```

. Drag a *Transform Message* component to the right of *Set Payload*. +

> This component transforms the JSON objects into an object that can be mapped to the data type `PEOPLE` that the stored procedure expects as its input parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This component transforms the JSON objects into an object that can be mapped to the data type `PEOPLE` that the stored procedure expects as an input parameter.
```

> . Double click the component in the Studio canvas, and set the name to `Transform Message - Prepare UDT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Double-click the component in the Studio canvas and set the name to `Transform Message - Prepare UDT`.
```

. In the *Output* source code view of the component, click the *Edit Current Target* button.

> . In the *Selection dialog* box, set the *Output* field to `Variable`, the *Variable name* to `in_people_tab`, and click *OK*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Selection dialog* box, set the *Output* field to `Variable` and the *Variable name* to `in_people_tab`, and then click *OK*.
```

> . In the *Output* field, set the following DataWeave expression that contains the `createStruct`  and `createArray` functions to create said object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Output* field, specify the following DataWeave expression:
```
I would omit the modifiers about the content and its purpose: it is stated earlier, contains an extra space, and it is unclear to what "said object" refers.

+
[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/java

fun toPhoneNumberArray(phoneNumber) = Db::createArray("dbConfig", "PHONE_NUMBER_ARRAY",[Db::createStruct("dbConfig", "PHONE_NUMBER", [phoneNumber.areaCode, phoneNumber.phoneNumber])])
fun toPerson(person) = Db::createStruct("dbConfig", "PERSON", [person.name, person.surname, person.age, toPhoneNumberArray(person.phoneNumber)])
---
Db::createArray("dbConfig", "PEOPLE", payload map (item, index) -> ( toPerson(item) ) )
----
+

.Transform Message configuration
image::database-oracleudt-example-6.png[Transform Message configuration]

[start=13]
. Drag a *Stored procedure* operation to the right of *Transform Message*. +
This operation calls the stored procedure using Database Connector.
. In the *Connector configuration* field, select `dbConfig` global configuration.

> . In the *SQL Query Text* field enter `{ call proc_insert_humans(:people, :phoneBook) }`. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *SQL Query Text* field, enter `{ call proc_insert_humans(:people, :phoneBook) }`. +
```

> . In the *Input Parameters* field enter `{ people: vars.in_people_tab}` +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Input Parameters* field, enter `{ people: vars.in_people_tab}` +
```

> To map the output of our transformation, which is stored in the variable called `in_people_tab` to our input parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step maps the output of the transformation, which is stored in the variable called `in_people_tab` to the input parameter.
```

. In the *Output Parametrs* field, select `Edit inline` and click the plus sign (*+*) to set a custom parameter:

* *Key* +
`phoneBook`
* *Custom type* +
`PHONE_BOOK`

.Stored procedure configuration
image::database-oracleudt-example-5.png[Stored procedure configuration]

[start=18]
. Drag a second *Transform Message* component to the right of *Stored procedure*.

> . Double click the component in the Studio canvas, and set the name to `Transform Message - response to JSON`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Double-click the component in the Studio canvas and set the name to `Transform Message - response to JSON`.
```

. In the *Output* source code view of the component, set the following DataWeave expression:
+
[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
---
payload
----
+
[start=20]
. Save the project.
. Test the app by using the following curl command in your terminal: `curl localhost:8081/oracle`. +
The stored procedure should return the list of phone numbers of all the people added to the table `HUMANS`.

> 

Reviewer: Wow, this one LONG task. Would it make any sense to break it into subtasks, maybe by operation?
